# WAZOBIA-NLP
A repo of resources for research, conservation, development, and documentation of Naija major low-resourced human languages, WA(Hausa), ZO(Yoruba) and BIA(Igbo).

# Background
Multilingual society is a society which has more than one significant language group. It is a sociolinguistic phenomenon that arises as a result of language contact. It is a situation in which two (i.e. bilingualism, specially) or more languages operate within the same context. Nigeria is a multilingual society with
an estimated number of indigenous languages ranging from 400 – 500 with Yoruba (WA), Hausa (ZO) and Igbo (BỊA) as the major languages with about 18 million speakers. WAZOBIA is made up of three words, each of which means 'come' in Yoruba (wa), Hausa (zo) and Igbo (bia). The fundamental problem in this type of society is to conveniently accept one of the languages as the National language. Any attempt to choose one of the languages at the expense of the other has proven a failure due to the fact that it appears, in the core of tribal disagreements, as discriminating and domineering on the other languages (Adegbite in LANGUAGE CONTACT IN NIGERIAN MULTILINGUAL SOCIETY, 2003). This has been one of the major reasons for challenges ranging from ethnic squabbles, security to gender imbalance which hinder developemt in the nation.

This projects thus looks at generating a multilingual corpus like the Canadian Hansard Corpus. It will focus on the three largest linguistics groups, WAZOBIA. Hence, the name WAZOBIA-NLP. This project will allow four equivalent texts are maintained, one in English, two, three, four others in Yoruba, Hausa and Igbo. Since English is the official language used in the nation, local news stations radio/Tv communicate mainly in English. Therefore, English is the source language from which target languages will be translated. This makes it a natural multiligual parallel text, and will often be used to train different machine translation, machine learning, NLP researches for different language combinations.

